Retention of Critical Knowledge
- Beth Collier – Environmental
Specialist: Air, Water and Waste
- GSUSI-PTS-S
Retention of Critical Knowledge
Report
Shell USA, Inc.
SRN-010382
September 2024
Author(s): Kosiara, Mark SHLUSA-HRL/LK; Collier, Beth B GSUSI-PTS/S
© Copyright vested in Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Companies
Restricted
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
Executive Summary
The ROCK exercise for Beth Collier was undertaken because Ms. Collier was retiring from
Shell after 21 years of Shell service. This ROCK was intended to supplement the handover
work that had already been done between Ms. Collier, her team lead, Rob Smith and the
team member taking her position, Maurice Pinder. Given Ms. Collier’s extensive
experience in managing the Environmental categories of air, water, and waste at the Shell
Technology Center Houston (STCH), multiple items that have been captured in this report
will be valuable to those working in this space in the future.
The initial ROCK interview was held on May 21st, 2024. Unlike other ROCK reports, this
ROCK intended to capture an inventory of the various regulatory jurisdiction and
reporting requirements for the key Environmental media (Air, water, and waste) that were
managed by Ms. Collier as well as any historic Environmental information that would not
necessarily be common knowledge at the site due to Ms. Coller’s tenure in this role. In
addition to this, the report also contains the more classic goal of capturing: key lessons
learned, best practices, risks/challenges for the future, and
recommendations/opportunities for improvement in the various topics discussed during the
interview. This report resulted in the latter items being captured during the ROCK
interview:
Category of Finding Number
Best Practice (Desire to Replicate) 3
Lessons Learned (No Specific Desire to 2
Replicate)
Risks / Challenges for the Future 4
Recommendations for the Future / Opportunities 2
for Improvement
These above items are detailed in the main text of this report in line with the interview
agenda, but they are also summarized by category in Section 9-12 of this report. For your
information, you can see the detailed agenda for the ROCK interview in the agenda flow
diagram embedded below.
Final Agenda.jpg
Internal - SRN-010382 2
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
Contents
Executive Summary .............................................................................................................. 2
1. Brief History of Time in Role and Key Roles & Responsibilities ...................................... 5
2. Regulatory Framework (Air, Water, Waste) ................................................................. 6
2.1. What are the applicable laws and requirements here? ............................................... 6
2.1.1. Air ............................................................................................................................. 6
2.1.2. Water ........................................................................................................................ 7
2.1.3. Waste ....................................................................................................................... 11
2.2. How does the information flow to meet the regulatory needs? ................................. 12
2.3. Processes at STCH for compliance and permitting new sources?............................... 13
2.4. Key Stakeholders at STCH (20+ VP-ships & Multiple Project Groups) ...................... 14
2.4.1. Project Groups – Capital Projects, Real Estate, 3rd Party Tenants........................... 14
2.5. Regulatory Contacts & External Contacts (Key Contacts) ......................................... 15
3. License to Operate Success ......................................................................................... 17
4. Site Specific Topics (Brief History & Current State of Each) ........................................ 19
4.1. MB Tank Farm, Contamination................................................................................... 19
4.2. Holding Ponds ............................................................................................................ 19
4.3. Well #3 Issue, Well #1 ............................................................................................... 20
5. LOPC Reduction Campaign ......................................................................................... 22
6. Sustainability: Net Zero Emissions, Respect for Nature, etc. ....................................... 23
7. Environmental Support Work (Consultation, MOCs, Project Recycling, Respect for
Nature, Flaring Issues, Chilled Water Pump) ...................................................................... 25
8. Personal Networks....................................................................................................... 27
9. Best Practices ............................................................................................................... 30
10. Lessons Learned ........................................................................................................... 32
11. Risks / Challenges for the Future ................................................................................. 34
12. Opportunities for Improvement / Recommendations for the Future ............................ 37
Internal - SRN-010382 3
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
13. Key Information Sources ............................................................................................. 38
Literature References .......................................................................................................... 39
Bibliographic Information ................................................................................................... 40
Internal - SRN-010382 4
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
1. Brief History of Time in Role and Key Roles &
Responsibilities
Ms. Collier has been at Shell for the past 21 years. At Shell Technology Center Houston
(STCH) she has been responsible for managing the air, water, and waste scope within the
environmental segment of HSSE.
Key Roles & Responsibilities
Within each of the three areas there are responsibilities for:
 Record keeping.
 Reporting – for example into the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ) or to Shell Group.
 Compliance with permit and associated regulatory requirements that are linked to
permit requirements.
 Other general responsibilities including site operations and site project support to
ensure alignment and compliance with all applicable Environmental and permit
related requirements.
Internal - SRN-010382 5
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
2. Regulatory Framework (Air, Water, Waste)
2.1. What are the applicable laws and requirements here?
2.1.1. Air
Air management at the site has many associated permits, which include:
 A Title 5 permit as well as several permits by rule (PBR). PBRs are general
operational permits that are relatively easy to obtain if operations meet criteria.
 The different PBR permits at STCH are associated with:
2 boilers, which are a Standard permit for Boiler 1 and a New Source
o
Review (NSR) permit for Boiler 2.
 The cogeneration unit which has a PBR permit, which is a general permit for
turbines.
The microgrid which has a standard permit associated with the (stationary)
o
natural gas generator, which is a non-emergency generator.
 The other non-emergency generator is associated with the laboratory at MS and
can be run at any time (under this PBR). Special requirements exist if exceeding a
specific number of run hours.
 Most buildings have an emergency generator, which are under restriction
regarding their use (all are PBR permits).
 Painting
 Abrasive blasting
 Welding
 Degreasing
 Flare
 See list of PBRs in Environmental files.
Air Reporting Requirements
Title 5
Title 5 is a federal operating air permit administered by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ). It has a semi-annual reporting requirement associated with
it, which is called a Deviation Report. These reports need to be signed off by the Site
Signatory Authority, who for TCEQ purposes is considered the Regulatory Official (RO)
for these two reports.
Additionally, there is an annual Certification Report that also needs to be signed off.
Air Emissions Inventory (AEI)
There is an annual Air Emissions Inventory report, which includes an overview of all the
Internal - SRN-010382 6
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
emissions from all laboratories, the boilers, CEB/flare, cogeneration unit etc. The site air
fees are based on those emissions each year.
This AEI report is the basis for several other annual reports:
 Greenhouse Gas Emissions report – a federal report submitted through the e-GGRT
system.
 Annual NOx certification/Mass Emissions Cap & Trade (MECT) – STCH is allotted
a certain volume of NOx emissions, any excess can be traded or sold.
Management has decided to keep these emissions credits in the event that STCH
needs to expand operations in the future, they could use these emission credit for
these new emission sources.
Texas Tier 2
The Texas Tier 2 report is an inventory of maximum annual storage. It is the maximum
inventory of a chemical on any specific day kept on site throughout the period of 1 year.
This falls under the Community Right-to-Know Act and this information gets submitted into
the State of Texas Environmental Electronic Reporting System (STEERS).
There are minimum thresholds associated with the hazardous chemicals included in this
inventory and associated report. If the threshold for a particular chemical is not met, then
a chemical does not need to be reported.
Aside from the TCEQ, the Tier 2 report is shared with:
 The local fire department, and
 The Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC).
This allows those organisations to plan for a response to a possible emergency on site.
Fire Extinguisher Training
The Fire Extinguisher Training report is written at the start of each year. This report lets the
city know if the site is planning to do any open burning and it is linked into the schedule for
fire extinguisher training that the fire chief and site training coordinator maintains.
Fees
Finally, there is a responsibility to report any fees incurred associated with the issuing of
any of the previously mentioned reports. A tracking document in Assurance SharePoint is
used to monitor annual fees and associated payments.
There are various types of fees paid for Environmental permits, applications for permits, for
emissions released, for waste generated, for violations if they occur and decide to cite us.
2.1.2. Water
There are several different types of water at STCH:
Internal - SRN-010382 7
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
 Potable water.
 Groundwater.
 Storm water.
 Wastewater.
 Steam and process water. Note: Utilities staff deal with this category of water and
Ms. Collier has little responsibility for management of this category except for when
it falls under the loss of primary containment reporting requirements or becomes a
sustainability issue. There are Shell Environmental Reporting requirements for
reporting water consumed at the site.
If there are any reportable incidents, then the first 4 categories above need to be reported
under the incident reporting system under the Environmental category.
Water Reporting Requirements
There are several agencies to which water use needs to be reported:
 Texas Water Development Board – An annual report is required that includes a
survey of ground and surface water use, which includes potable water received
from the city of Houston, as well as water pumped up from the groundwater well
on site.
 Harris-Galveston Subsidence District (HGSD) – HGSD provide the permit for the
groundwater well. It is well #2134, better known as Water Well 3 on the site.
 An annual report on water pumped is required by HGSD. The City of Houston
supplied water goes on this report as well.
 An annual permit needs to be obtained for Well 3. An application for permit is
submitted which starts the renewal process.
The permit has requirements around calibration of the flow meter. STCH has two meters
that are swapped out annually and calibrated annually. Calibration is done by third
parties and the third party submits the calibration report to the TCEQ. While the
requirement to calibrate is not as frequent as every year, this practice is followed to avoid
missing this activity as has happened historically.
STCH submits a Meter Card Report annually to let HGSD know what meter is in service, as
required.
 The Safe Drinking Water Act, managed by the city of Houston drives backflow
preventor compliance at STCH. The backflow preventer protects the city from any
possible contaminants that might come from STCH’s water system. It also protects
each system where those preventors are installed.
There are domestic water preventors, fire water preventors, and irrigation
o
preventors.
Internal - SRN-010382 8
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
 The Brown & Root Master Plumber currently does this testing for the irrigation and
domestic preventers. In the past, the American Fire Protection Group (AFPG) has
also done this testing.
 The testing of the fire backflow preventors requires special certification, thus, AFPG
still completes these tests.
 Once the test is completed, it is entered into the SWIFT compliance system or
current system the City of Houston is using (SWIFT is Houston’s programme to
manage due dates and fees). [Ms. Collier does not have direct access to the SWIFT
system, so she is dependent upon a report produced from the SWIFT system, which
usually lags compared to when reports have been submitted. Subsequent checking
on SWIFT is therefore required to verify compliance with reporting requirements.]
Potable Water Testing
 Potable water Residual Chlorine testing and flushing is done by the SET group. The
city should be sending the site chlorinated water, but water is treated differently at
various city treatment locations and on occasion the site receives water with low
chlorine residual. SET tests for both types of chlorine residual at the sample point
where water comes into the facility. If there are issues, it can be managed. The
chlorine residuals in the storage tank on site are monitored for correction. If issues
are found, then the city of Houston is notified. This could also require that the
internal water lines at the site need to be flushed out. (if the issue was detected too
late) There is a policy in place that details the potable water procedure. It is in the
HSSE Manual and covers everything from the regulatory levels that chlorine
residual must meet, and it lists the flushing and testing points. (See HSSE Manual
Potable Water Procedures.)
 Although Ms. Collier is not directly responsible for the execution of this work, she
does track compliance because she must manage any reporting and inspection
activities associated with compliance to the regulations.
 Note: Permits are posted in the STCH Assurance SharePoint site. Each media has a
permit file.
Storm water requirements
There are several key components to storm water:
 Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. A storm water general permit,
which is somewhat like a PBR. If the criteria of the permit are met than anyone can
have that permit, which is better than having individual permits for each sector of
the facility. It is a multi-sector general permit for industrial facilities.
 Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) - One of the requirements of
the permit. This plan lists all the potential areas of contamination. Sources that
Internal - SRN-010382 9
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
are permitted to go into the storm water system are identified. Testing
requirements are also listed. If all these requirements are kept in place, then the
general permit can be used. If there are issues, then it might mean that
individual permits are required. (leading to higher cost, higher requirements)
Annual training of individuals concerning activities (SWPPP) that could contribute to
contamination of the storm water system is required. Ms. Collier does this training, and it
normally involves individuals who are active in outdoor processing areas. Work is also
done with the landscape crew, as well as any third-party contractors working on site. The
training plan is reviewed annually. (Note: Training documents are stored in SharePoint
under the SPCC and SWPPP section within the water folder.)
When STCH still had individual stormwater permits in place, after each rain occurrence,
someone had to go out and take samples. Each sample had to be analysed on 4
parameters by an external lab (which had collection, shipping, analytical, reporting etc.
costs). Those reports had to be consolidated into monthly Discharge Monitoring Reports
(DMR). There was also a requirement to do biotesting every 5 years. The multi-sector
general permit only has a yearly requirement to test for metals. This data goes into a
Discharge Monitoring Report (DMR), and it is only submitted if there are failures (to date
none have occurred). This general permit is on a 5-year cycle.
Best Practice – Environmental Training is more effective when done in person
for on-site staff that could impact storm water discharge limit compliance
When training staff and contractors at a laboratory facility like Shell Technology
Center Houston, it is important to help them understand that they are an important
part of the process in keeping the storm water conveyance system as clean as
possible. Each activity on site can cause issues for the storm water system if
precautions are not taken. It is therefore important to follow the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan and make sure there is good communication (best
achieved through in-person visits) with the various parties working on site.
Compliance Calendar
There is a compliance calendar that details which reports are due when and the
regulations that drive each report submittal. It is a managed Excel spreadsheet, stored
within Assurance SharePoint.
Best Practice – Environmental compliance requirement monitoring is improved
through use of a central tracking tool:
All laboratory site Environmental compliance requirements (i.e.: testing, reporting,
training) at Shell Technology Center Houston are managed together in one single
electronic repository. (i.e.: An Excel spreadsheet) Centralizing this information for
Internal - SRN-010382 10
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
the requirements of all environmental media (Air, Water, Waste) helps ensure that
compliance oversight is consolidated and can be monitored/managed in one
place. Distributing these requirements to various departments or individuals leads
to higher exposure for non-compliance during staff/organizational changes.
2.1.3. Waste
Managing the Waste media deals with collection, handling, storage, and disposal of
various waste stream categories at site. It also requires managing the different reports
required for these waste streams and the associated waste management processes.
 Annual Waste Summary – A key report that SET creates based on all the on-site
Hazardous and Non-hazardous class 1 materials (materials that have been a part
of an industrial process but are not strictly hazardous/dangerous). After the
document receives the necessary approvals and is signed off, it is submitted to the
TCEQ via the STEERS system. Once it is in the system, minor adjustments can be
made on an annual basis. (TCEQ State of Texas Environmental Electronic
Reporting System STEERS) ()
 Waste Source Reduction Plan. Because STCH is classified as a large quantity
generator of waste, there is a requirement to create a plan to reduce waste s
volumes. SET also creates this plan and works with waste generators on site to
identify waste streams that would be candidates for reduction. Ms. Collier oversees
this process. A 5-year plan is presented to the state and progress is reported
annually in the Annual Performance Report (APR).
 All wastes streams at site are tracked, even though some do not require reporting
to regulators. Internal Shell requirements require a report to be generated
quarterly for Shell head office.
Project Environmental Support
There are two types of projects undertaken at STCH, ones that build or remove buildings,
and research projects. These projects can have various durations, so it is critical to support
these projects in managing Environmental permitting requirements, etc., which is a key role
of Ms. Collier’s position. This also means providing training to those individuals that are
required to sign off on the various waste manifests, reports, etc. associated with these
projects.
Waste Facility Assurance & Verification
Another activity managed by Ms. Collier is the assurance and verification of the various
facilities (e.g.: Reuse, Recycling, Disposal) that Shell uses to process waste materials. These
facilities need to meet Shell’s requirements. STCH attempts to limit the number of facilities
it uses for waste management so that the long-term Environmental liability is reduced.
Internal - SRN-010382 11
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
STCH has joined an industry consortium CHWMEG (Not an Acronym) that audits Offsite
Residual Management facilities. This means that each member company does not have to
go out and audit each waste treatment facility they use. CHWMEG Audits can be very
extensive with reports being over 100s of pages, and these audits are done on a 3 to 5-
year cadence. STCH Waste Leads analyse these reports and recommend facilities that are
suitable for use. (Note: There are also approved waste subject matter experts (SME)
within Shell that can be called upon for support when needed.) If SET is considering
sending waste to a facility not currently being used, its approval status for use can be
verified by consulting the list of approved facilities or an audit must be considered for the
new site before use depending on the type of facility. (Note: A complete list of approved
facilities can be found in the Waste Catalogue, which is managed globally by Cindy
Chen.)
Class 3 Non-Hazardous Waste
It is generally not beneficial to label waste as class 3 because this classification of waste
requires special additional analysis. The price difference between class 2 and class 3
disposal in not big enough to justify the additional costs associated with analysis of the
waste. It would only be beneficial for very large volumes of class 3 waste.
There is a waste management procedure, found in the HSSE manual, which speaks to how
each category of waste (e.g., batteries, light bulbs etc.) should be managed. The manual
helps direct an employee to the right person who will know how to dispose of a specific
waste.
If SET notices any miss-management of waste disposal (e.g., throwing aerosol cans in
regular waste bins) then they will contact Ms. Collier to help inform the parties that are
managing waste incorrectly. Follow up by Ms. Collier is intended to educate/train the
individuals, so the wastes are managed properly going forward. An event should be
entered if this occurs.
2.2. How does the information flow to meet the regulatory needs?
Meetings per Calendar Year
Outside of non-scheduled regular communication, there are several cadence meetings held
during a calendar year to manage Air, Water, and Waste related issues:
 A notice of registration meeting is held two times a year. This meeting discusses all
the waste streams and waste units on site.
 Three times a year there is a meeting on storm water to discuss any concerns and
to complete the Comprehensive Site Stormwater Inspection required by the Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).
Internal - SRN-010382 12
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
A hard copy yearly calendar is used to track compliance-related deliverables. (This was
kept previously by Ms. Collier.)
SET has given their employees and others a SWAG card that can be used to stop work.
This is a guarantee that any employee has the authority to STOP work. Any employee at
STCH is empowered to initiate a SWAG if they feel that activities are not meeting HSE
requirements. If there are any issues related to the Stop Work Authority Guarantee
(SWAG), this would be dealt with in a special ad hoc meeting.
Spill Prevention Control & Countermeasures (SPCC) Plan
The SPCC plan is also a requirement at STCH. The Environmental Specialist, Ms. Collier, is
responsible for this. The SPCC plan is mandated by the Oil Pollution Act (OPA) 1990
because there is a state water boundary at the northern edge of the STCH site.
The plan needs to be updated every year as needed and every 5 years needs to be
certified by a PE. The plan will need to be renewed in 2026, which is normally done by a
consultant (AECOM).
Documents
All Environmental documents necessary to meet regulatory and internal Shell requirements
are stored on SharePoint. A large amount of data is collected from various sources at
STCH, and it is then fed into the various reports. If an Environmental incident occurs, then it
is beneficial to physically go out to the location at the site and personally follow-up to get
a good impression of what is going on to help develop plans to prevent reoccurrence and
to complete any required reporting.
Environmental related documents can, and where necessary, should be marked as records
so that they are not automatically deleted after 3 years.
Lesson Learned – Site Environmental experts at a laboratory facility should inspect site
conditions after an Environmental incident
It can be invaluable for Environmental experts at a laboratory facility, like Shell
Technology Center Houston, to get out to the site after Environmental incidents
occur. This allows the experts to understand the causes of incidents, conditions
under which the incidents occurred, and helps them to determine ways to help the
site prevent recurrence of similar incidents. This is not to say that normal Incident
Investigations are not warranted, but these visual observations by Environmental
staff who understand the regulatory and non-regulatory requirements, gives them
additional data for future improvement planning.
2.3. Processes at STCH for compliance and permitting new sources?
The process at STCH for permitting new sources is initiated through the site Management
of Change (MOC) process. The MOC HSSE representative involved in individual MOC
Internal - SRN-010382 13
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
reviews makes sure that participants are aware when permitting new sources what would
be required by changing site activities. If a new Environmental permit will/could be
required, then the MOC process triggers an interface with Ms. Collier. The MOC
Coordinator may also bring in other SMEs that can address specific topics in the permit.
MOCs are discussed in weekly meetings, and if those are attended then it is easy to follow
any developments on MOCs requiring new Environmental permits or other Environmental
activity. The HSSE manager also discusses any ongoing projects during Incident Review
Team (IRT+) meetings and in the weekly project status meetings. These internal and
external meetings are additional controls to help assure that there is appropriate
Environmental team involvement in each actual or possible new permit request or other
Environmental need.
2.4. Key Stakeholders at STCH (20+ VP-ships & Multiple Project
Groups)
There are representatives in the site HSE team to cover each of the VP-ships at STCH.
These HSSE representatives will update Ms. Collier if something new is going on and they
will ask her about any future steps that need to be taken from an Environmental
perspective.
2.4.1. Project Groups – Capital Projects, Real Estate, 3rd Party Tenants
Third parties are generally brought to STCH through the Real Estate group, as Real Estate
facilitates the lease for the third-party tenants. These 3rd Party leases each require an HSE
plan, which Ms. Collier helps deliver through an environmental review. For some
Environmental items, Environmental services and support are provided on site and for
other items the third party will have to secure their own Environmental expertise to help
with permit applications, reporting, and general environmental compliance.
Real Estate has several other interfaces that could require engagement with the site
Environmental expert. Examples include:
 Real Estate creates a new class 2 waste that needs to be tracked.
 The Landscape team uses herbicides, pesticides and algicides on site and those
need to be vetted to make sure they do not create issues for the site. Changes to
these would require Environmental engagement.
 Recycling efforts to lead sustainability efforts. For example, ordering furniture can
play into sustainability goals for the site and environmental expertise on circular
economy issues of new furniture lines may be needed.
Ms. Collier is both a knowledge source for Real Estate, as well as a support partner should
they require it. Recently the responsibilities of the Real Estate team have decreased, and
Internal - SRN-010382 14
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
those responsibilities have moved to PTX Operations.
Advice: To keep up to date with changes it is beneficial to maintain close relationships with
all parties involved so that there is an awareness if there are any changes. For example,
Brown & Root has moved from a Real Estate contract to P&T, so having close connections
means that the new interface for that contract is known from the start. Many of these
changes have happened in the past year, so there is still an ongoing process around the
changes that have been put in place. Managing these organisational changes can only be
done through frequent engagements with the parties involved.
Building these relationships helps build and earn trust. If people know what must be done
with the information and that it will not be a negative impact on an individual if they share
trust. At most Shell locations no one intentionally goes against regulations, so the best
thing to do is admit that a mistake has been made. That can then be fixed and make it
possible to move forward.
Recommendation for the Future – Staying ahead of Environmental changes at a Shell
laboratory have been dependent upon having strong personal relationships with key
site stakeholders based upon mutual trust
Roles and responsibilities at a laboratory site like Shell Technology Center Houston
(STCH) change with personnel changes, site leadership changes, and site
management approaches change with time. The best way to ensure understanding
of the possible environmental implications of changes at a site as large and
complex as STCH, is to maintain close relationships with all parties involved so that
there is an awareness if there are any changes. Building these relationships and not
placing blame when things go wrong, helps build and earn trust with key
stakeholders. During times of change, these relationships pay dividends by
unsolicited sharing of information with the Environmental focal point, and support
to ensure seamless handover of activities that help to maintain environmental
compliance and improved environmental performance.
2.5. Regulatory Contacts & External Contacts (Key Contacts)
[Limited Time was spent on this topic during the ROCK interview]
TCEQ
There are key contacts in each media. TCEQ has an extensive list on their website. Other
than that, TCEQ will contact Ms. Collier as she is listed in their system as the key contact
for all associated programmes.
 Camella Widdenhoffer is the contact in TCEQ for the Title 5 permitting process.
 Ms. Toledo works in the subsidence district.
Internal - SRN-010382 15
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
EPA
The EPA process is much the same as TCEQ and they will contact Ms. Collier for
inspections etc.. For both EPA and TCEQ, Maurice Pinder will take over the responsibility
as the key STCH contact going forward.
[Please review to “Section 8: Personal Contacts” for additional information on external
regulatory contacts.]
Shell Internal not STCH
Ms. Collier is connected with SMEs across Shell on waste etc. She is also a member of
forums within Shell, such as the Carbon & Environment group and the Waste group. They
both have monthly connections that she will attend. However, STCH being a research
facility is quite different to most other facilities in Shell (upstream or manufacturing) and
STCH therefore has different regulatory requirements compared to most other classic
Upstream or Manufacturing locations in the US. The other technology centres in Shell are
all in other countries, so they fall under very different regulations, which are not directly
comparable to those that apply to STCH.
 Diana Hank, a waste SME, holds a meeting on a regular basis that allows those
interested to connect and discuss the different issues around waste and auditing.
 Lynda Beach, Environmental Skillpool manager. She helps bring relevant parties
together and helps develop staff.
 Michael Kohnke leads the groundwater group.
 Albert Janssen leads the group for Water and Waste.
 Cindy Chen can be contacted to see who currently manages the latest Air related
items. STCH is such a small facility regarding air, Ms. Collier attends the meetings
to keep informed of general developments, most of which are not applicable to
STCH.
 STCH has a dedicated Shell attorney, Ms. Erin Pena.
Internal - SRN-010382 16
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
3. License to Operate Success
It is often undervalued how much work goes into regulatory compliance.
Challenge for the Future – If Shell Technology Center Houston (STCH) is moved
to the Woodcreek site
A challenge for the future would be if the STCH decides to move operations to the
nearby Woodcreek site. All current permits would have to be analysed and likely
new permits would have to be acquired for such a move. Some of the items of
particular concern include: permitting a new flare at Woodcreek (each PBR permit
would have to be assessed for the new location as these permit requirements are
tied to the distance to the nearest receptor), certain STCH permits (e.g.: the Cogen
unit) are grandfathered under older regulations and wouldn’t likely remain
grandfathered with a location move. Furthermore, environmental compliance
would need to continue to be managed at STCH for closure while new permits are
being acquired for research related activities at Woodcreek.
Challenge for the Future – Changing activities at Shell Technology Center
Houston (STCH) could either simplify or complicate Environmental permits and
environmental compliance at the laboratory site
The STCH laboratory site is currently at a major decision crossroad. It is unsure if
the STCH will move, if it will stay where it is and get smaller, or if it will stay where
it is and take on more 3rd Party customers and grow. If STCH moves, the regulatory
requirements will likely increase as historically grandfathered equipment/permits
having to be re-permitted for the new location. If STCH gets smaller due to
changing activities, some Environmental permitting and compliance elements might
become easier. However, if new third parties are brought onsite, they would need
to be aligned with STCH’s operations at the time, which might require different
and/or additional environmental controls.
Risk for the Future – Numerous small Environmental permit violations at a
laboratory facility can lead to unwanted attention from regulators. Managing
the small things (or the details) is therefore very important
It is often the little things that sometimes get forgotten about, which in turn can
cause minor permit violations. Numerous small violations can get the attention of
regulatory agencies and bring agency personnel to the site for inspections because
they are seeing these numerous small permit violations. This means that if required
information or data is omitted from Environmental reports, or if minor permit
Internal - SRN-010382 17
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
infractions occur, these can have detrimental implications down the line. This is
because Shell Technology Center Houston is a self-reporting entity, so not including
things, or multiple minor violations can cause larger and possibly expensive
repercussions for the business if regulators get interested and more involved.
Internal - SRN-010382 18
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
4. Site Specific Topics (Brief History & Current State
of Each)
4.1. MB Tank Farm, Contamination
There has been some historical contamination from spills (gasoline, diesel) at the tank
farm. There is a report documenting this, which has recently been incorporated into the
excavation procedure. There might be new information that needs to be gathered, but that
will be determined by future activities planned in the area.
In certain areas the soil is labelled as hazardous waste and in other areas it is not. It
depends on the chromium and lead content (not organics) of the soil that was identified by
past work and soil testing.
A research group once on site put in some research projects for testing remediation of the
soil, which they wanted to apply commercially. For the projects, a site characterisation
report was written up, which has been added to the current excavation procedure
currently in place.
4.2. Holding Ponds
The dry basin was put in as a storm water retention pond for the installation of one of the
new buildings on site (N-building). It was a requirement for construction of that building, so
the area needs to be maintained. However, adequate maintenance was not done until
recently. With the recent maintenance a concrete pathway was put in to allow water to
flow. Care needs to be taken to keep that area well maintained because if not it can
quickly become overgrown and inaccessible, thus becoming a wetland.
Advice
It would be beneficial to turn responsibility for maintaining the storm water retention pond
area over to Real Estate, a group that already manages similar areas on site. This work is
currently done through Compass, a third party that does landscaping services for Real
Estate. Many contractors do not like to maintain an area like the dry basin because it
remains semi wet (snake habitat, machinery movement issues, it gets overgrown quickly,
etc.).
Furthermore, the facility needs to keep removing litter because if not, litter will end up in
similar areas and be washed off site (outfalls). It can be difficult to motivate teams to pick
up litter that is someone else’s garbage, but it must be removed.
New Sandblasting & Painting Area
With the new sandblasting and painting area on site, care still needs to be taken to not
execute work if winds are unfavourable for any of the neighbours.
Internal - SRN-010382 19
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
There is no procedure in place yet, but it would be beneficial to do so. If a new painting
booth needs to be installed, a PBR will need to be set up specifically for this unit.
Recommendation for the Future – A sandblasting procedure for the new sandblasting
area at the Shell Technology Center Houston should be developed and implemented to
protect neighbouring properties in certain wind conditions
Highway 6
One of the holding ponds (the first or second pond past the dry basin – pipe is visible on
west side) is also connected to a ditch that runs along Highway 6. If there is an accident
on the highway, it could potentially lead to liquids from the accident (e.g. petrol or diesel)
getting into the holding pond. This connectivity was present even before the site was built
up by Shell (previously there was a creek running through the site).
For example, in the past, there was a spill on the highway that potentially caused fish
deaths in the pond.
 Gerry Edge – An independent contractor (structural engineer) who manages
permitting for STCH with the city of Houston has knowledge about the history of
this situation.
4.3. Well #3 Issue, Well #1
Freshwater Well 3
The important point for this well is that the permitted extraction limit is not exceeded (3
million gallons). It is very easy to withdraw that maximum amount.
One of the goals is to keep water in the holding ponds, if those get too dry then the fish in
those ponds will die. This could lead to external sources thinking that the cause of the fish
death is some chemical that was released in the water, when that is not the cause.
The main use of the well is to put water in the ponds so that the correct water level is
maintained. If the extraction limit is reached, then adding more water from the well into
the pond is not possible. This rarely happens unless additions are not managed properly.
Freshwater Well 1 & Freshwater Well 2
Wells 1 and 2 were used to supply potable water for the facility. However, the subsidence
district halted groundwater withdrawals because of subsidence. Those two wells have
been plugged and formally abandoned. However, it is possible to drill those plugs out and
the subsidence district has stated in the past that one well can be drilled for emergency use
(freeze protection), if desired.
In order to move forward, conversations need to be started up with the subsidence district
around what is available for the site and the types of permit volumes would be allowed.
Texas Railroad Commission (TRRC)
To drill an oil or gas well in Texas, one needs to be registered with the Texas Railroad
Internal - SRN-010382 20
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
Commission under the P5 document. Shell had wells in the Permian Basin, outside of
College Station, and in Hempstead. Those wells have officially all been plugged and
abandoned. However, the TRRC continued sending renewals for the P5, even though those
wells were not active anymore. There are two other Shell staff who are familiar with these
issues:
 Toylaine Spencer - PCRO (Spencer, Toylaine H SHLUSA-FM/I/P/A1)
 Jane Newitt - (Newitt, Jane A SHLUSA-FM/I/P/A)
Internal - SRN-010382 21
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
5. LOPC Reduction Campaign
STCH does a lot of research for other Shell entities, as well as third parties. Samples are
sent via various courier services (FedEx, UPS, DHL, etc.). In the past, many of the samples
that came in were leaking likely due to incorrect packaging prior to shipping which may
have been completed by folks in the field or even companies who actually prepare
samples for shipment. This created a lot of problems for our site, so something needed to
be done to improve sample shipping.
New Processes Instituted
If a leaking package came from another Shell entity, then the owner would be looked up
in the Shell database and an incident management report would be sent to them, as they
were accountable for that shipment (and hence accountable for the spill).
Instituting this accountability has led to a large reduction in sample spills by educating the
shippers and attributing spills to them. Those sending improperly shipped packages could
not adjust shipping practices until they knew that the packages arrived with leaking liquids.
For third parties, sample packaging guidance has been shared with them. Shell cannot
mandate the guidance, but many are now doing a better job at sending samples without
leaks.
These process changes have led to a big reduction in leaking packages, and to lower
LOPC counts.
Leah Hogendoorn is a Dangerous Good Specialist for the Americas, but she did not want
to take on the responsibility for writing the shipping document, as many of the shipping
products did not meet dangerous goods requirements. She did provide guidance in
publishing the document and has audited STCH in the past.
Lessons Learned – Volumes of Sample Spills were significantly reduced when shipping
parties were made aware of improper packaging issues and were held accountable for
the sample spill volumes
The Shell Technology Center Houston laboratory does a significant amount of
research for various Shell entities, and other 3rd parties. Historically, many of the
samples that were shipped to the site via normal courier services (FedEx, UPS, DHL,
etc.) arrived leaking. A process was instituted that leaking package entities were
contacted about the spill from their samples, were educated on proper shipping
procedures, and spill volumes were attributed to their respective organizations, if
they were Shell entities. This procedure significantly reduced spill volumes due to
improperly shipped samples over time. (Non-Shell entities were sent proper sample
shipping guidance when spilled samples were received from them.)
Internal - SRN-010382 22
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
6. Sustainability: Net Zero Emissions, Respect for
Nature, etc.
Sustainability goals come from Shell head office, so no selection decisions on these goals
are made at STCH. Projects at STCH do not want to spend the money on certain things
that might help reach sustainability goals, which means that the Environmental team has to
make sure to keep awareness high around sustainability so that goals might be adopted
on a project-by-project basis without mandating them. For example, a new project could
look to utilise renewable electricity, but the project would have to go out and source it.
An Environmental Specialist cannot influence this process much. The only things that can
be done are to stay connected with projects that have sustainability opportunities (e.g.,
recycling materials during a building demolition), make them aware of Shell Sustainability
goals, and require them to report their sustainability data into the Environmental
Specialist.
The three key challenges in this space are:
 Implementing sustainable development goals that come from Shell Group are often
very difficult because these goals are not aligned with sustainability opportunities
that can actually be implemented at the STCH site.
 The Environmental staff at STCH have limited ability to influence projects and
business entities on site to incorporate Shell Group sustainability goals into their
practices.
 Projects have a limited budget and often do not use that budget to pursue
sustainable development goals, or only choose to adopt low-cost sustainability
goals.
Challenge for the Future – Shell Group Sustainability Goals are often not applicable to
a Shell Research type facility and those that are face significant challenges to
achievement at a business or project level at the site
There are 3 key challenges to implementing Shell Group Sustainability goals at a
laboratory facility like the Shell Technology Center Houston: Implementing sustainable
development goals that come from Shell Group are often very difficult because these
goals are not aligned with sustainability opportunities that can actually be
implemented at the STCH site. The Environmental staff at STCH have limited ability to
influence projects and business entities and on site, and no power to mandate that they
incorporate Shell Group sustainability goals into their practices. Projects have a limited
budget and often do not use that budget to pursue sustainable development goals, or
only choose to adopt low-cost goals.
Internal - SRN-010382 23
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
Respect for Nature
There are a number of activities at STCH that contribute to or could be categorized as
Respect for Nature activities:
 The storm water programme is a big contributor to Respect for Nature.
 Assurance activities for recyclers, and disposal companies etc.. Not all recycling
and disposal companies are run well and can harm nature in a variety of ways.
Waste related assurance activities minimize Shell from using those companies that
are poorly run, and whose activities would negatively impact the environment and
nature.
 Advising landscaping companies on chemical use on site. This could result in the
landscape companies limiting the types and amounts of chemicals used in their
activities, guide their activities so that even if certain chemicals are used, they are
used in a manner that does not negatively affect other areas (e.g., drift into the
water). Note: This requires Environmental staff reviewing the products being used,
as some items on the market for commercial use can be very toxic for the
environment.
 All the cats on the site have been spayed and neutered so that they do not
continue multiplying.
 An attempt was made to incorporate the Wildlife at Work programme at STCH, but
due to staff constraints, this program had limited success. This program could be
revisited again in the future.
Internal - SRN-010382 24
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
7. Environmental Support Work (Consultation, MOCs,
Project Recycling, Respect for Nature, Flaring Issues,
Chilled Water Pump)
Environmental support is almost always involved in the MOC process, as each project will
typically have at least a small environmental element associated with it. For example, the
STCH site transformation project included significant demolition work, which would lead to
a lot of opportunity for recycling of waste streams. Environmental support focuses on
connecting with the project HSE Manager and support them and SET to make sure that the
project would receive the support to be able to recycle as much material as possible.
The flare is a permitted source, a pollution control device, and comes under the highly
reactive volatile organic compounds (HRVOC) regulations. For some of the flare projects
in addition to just the site Environmental expert, other Shell SMEs have been brought in for
their support. Environmental support is always made available for flare related issues via
the Environmental Specialist.
There is a biotreatment request form online that all projects have to fill out if the project is
going to create wastewater that requires disposal in the process sewer facilities. When a
project has completed the form, it is sent to the three different approvers (operational,
environmental, and waste). In this way, Environmental support is included in potential
changes and/or potential impacts to the POTW or biotreatment plant, downstream. See
the waste management procedure found in the HSE Manual for details.
There are so many projects coming and going at STCH, with very diverse waste streams,
the site must take care not to upset the publicly owned treatment works (POTW). Because
STCH is the only industrial contributor to that local POTW, they will automatically blame
STCH if an issue comes up (whether STCH is responsible or not). Environmental support
gets involved as requested to help address POTW related issues and prevent problems at
the local POTW.
Best Practice – Effective communication and interpersonal skills are critical to
Environmental support staff working at a Shell laboratory site such as Shell Technology
Center Houston
Communication is one of the best traits someone can have who is working in the
environmental space. If there is poor communication then that will put other parties
on edge, which can be very detrimental in the environmental space. It is important
not to give the impression that you are holding back or hiding something. Open and
honest communication, including listening to the other party and trying to understand
their view, as well as trying to meet their needs, is of great benefit. Other parties
Internal - SRN-010382 25
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
(regulators etc.) have a reason for doing what they need to do and so letting them
do that will put them at ease.
Internal - SRN-010382 26
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
8. Personal Networks
Key Contacts: Internal to Shell
Environmental
 Diana Henk – Senior Soil & Groundwater Specialist
 Michael Kohnke - Soil & Groundwater SME
 Albert Janssen is the Water and Waste SME with PTS/ED
 Cindy Chen is the Waste person in PTS/ED helps with auditing vendors. Shell’s
representative at CHWMEG. She manages audit requests, which can come at a
reduced rate if applied for in advance.
 Tim Smith (Environmental Skillpool) is a Waste SME who analyses the CHWMEG
reports. Sometimes those reports are pre-processed by third parties to make them
more manageable for the SME to review.
 Environmental Attorney – Erin Pena
 Ellen Hall – Air Emissions Tool – Joe Day can provide #
 Kristin Knoll K2Environmental can score the CHWMEG and 3rd party waste audits
prior to SME review if the SME requests this service, her number is 615-579-0727.
STCH Site Contacts
 Site Generator rep. Carlos Gutierrez w/ B&R
 Painting & Sandblasting (SDSs) rep. Jerry McNeil w/ B&R
 Boilers, Cogen, Flare, Gasoline, and Diesel – CJ (Callan Dyke) at Utilities with B&R
– 281-544-9304, 832-232-1021
 Refrigerant’s rep. James Pianezzola (JP) I think w/ B&R – Refrigerants inventory
only accessible on the one computer in HVAC office. 832-474-5241
 Pioneer – Waste (Shredding) Lester Bradley
 Compass – Waste and Recycle (Office and Café) Geramy (Gerald) Roach 832-
272-6696 and Daniela Pineda 346-804-9074 and Cristina Gonzalez 713-922-
1684
 Stormwater – Dustin Frazier with SET – 713-899-6660
 Potable Water – CJ w/ B&R and Jerry Quintanilla with B&R + Dustin Frazier with
SET
 Waste – Luke Pickrell – SET – 281-380-3417
 Brian Joiner – SET for all services assistance – 281-620-3673
 Aziz Meleka – Real Estate Projects Portfolio Manager – 480-329-0536
 Derrick Heyde – American Fire Protection - Fire Back-Flow Preventers
 Brent Norris – Fire Chief – 979-739-6829 Should be listed in SPCC/SWPPP Plans
 Brian Ussery – Site Shell Good Guy that does a lot with projects and helps
Environmental a lot – 832-573-3475
Internal - SRN-010382 27
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
 Brian Webster – Site Infrastructure & Utilities Manager 360-333-1556
 Carol Whitmire PTX/T (Knows a lot about that group, been here 30+ years) – 281-
544-8726, 832-202-6223
 Charlie Solito – RE Environmental guy – 281-544-9291, 907-280-7812 – Will help
you gather and can provide you the RE Project waste
 Dan Didier – SET’s Regulatory guy if you need any help, mostly in waste 713-641-
7574
 Jaime Smith – Electrician for Transformer questions or the working of the Stationary
Generators all over site – 713-412-2519
 Jerry McNeil – B&R Safety and posts Paint & Sandblast records 281-636-8249
 Jerry or Gerry Quintanilla – knows a lot about the STCH plumbing system and will
come to you with repair on the potable water system work – you can ask him
about disinfection 281-492-4119
 Joe McKinney – SET – good waste contact and was at STCH for a while 713-816-
3728
 STCH Maintenance 713-241-2345
 Meagan Middleton – SET – 281-253-2513
 Mike Fish Micro-Grid – Nat Gas Engine and renewable power generated
 Randy Neuendorff – B&R 979-942-6838 – he can help with hanging stuff at gate
for permit public notice and inspects some stormwater stuff around their activities
 Rekha Hanumanthan – SET provides numbers for Quarterly Environmental report
 Robert Hardy – B&R works on potable water and in soils/excavations, has been
around a long time – 832-310-3911
 Trung Vo – Pi guy for flare info. 409-225-1889
 Rosa Aguilar – EO Micro Reactors – 281-544-6931
 Unit 16 (After Hrs Guys that rove around site. They do initial response to releases
at night that they find so they may call you. Good to give them your Shell
number 832-416-2037
 Vehicle Assistance - @ STCH if your car won’t start, etc. 281-544-8155
 Victor Maldonado – B&R and has been here a long time. Knows a lot about a lot
of things but has his finger on the pulse of back-flow preventers 713-498-5606
Other
 Computer Help Desk – Shell – 312-843-5291
Key Contacts: External
 Yolanda Toledo – 281-956-2189 Hours: 6 – 3 Harris-Galveston Subsidence District
(HGSD)
 Camilla Widenhofer – TCEQ Federal Title V Permit Engineer
Internal - SRN-010382 28
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
 TCEQ Air Permits Division
P.O. Box 13087, MC 163
Austin, TX 78753
Phone: (512)239-1028
Fax: (512)239-1300
camilla.widenhofer@tceq.texas.gov
 TCEQ Reg 12 Air Guy – 713-767-3720
 TCEQ Air others 713-767-3712, 713-767-3500, 713-767-3714
 TCEQ – All water issues WQ #0001853000 888-777-3186
 TCEQ – Austin 512-239-1000 or 512-463-7727
 TCEQ – Spill # 713-767-3563
 TCEQ STEERS 512-239-6925
 Harris County Pollution Control – 713-920-2831
 NRC – Coast Guard Command Center to report RQ/reportable releases other
than minor stormwater releases – 866-370-3865
 City of Houston Air Monitoring Trailer by the MicroGrid – 832-393-5703, Contact
James Fabian 281-865-6813 - Combination for lock either for them or our
landscape guys to get in there to mow is 9898
 City of Houston Potable water lady, Julie Huerta 346-266-4483
 City of Houston guy that flushes the hydrant coming inside STCH, like for low
chlorine residual – Scott Barker 713-562-2957
 City Potable Water Lab for Bacterial Testing – 832-393-3939 – Our account is
#1010557
 Terri May – AECOM (Air Consultant) Cell – 832-875-7351 best way to reach
her Katy Office 281-675-3591
 Angela Johnson – AECOM (Waste/SPCC/SWPPP Consultant) – 832-244-2903
 XENCO Lab now Eurofins Debbie Simmons 281-240-4200 Ext. 1104 and cell 281-
630-9242 if an emergency – Does analysis on water and waste for us.
 Eurofins – Lance Tigrett if you need help with issues on analysis 979-484-9088
Internal - SRN-010382 29
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
9. Best Practices
Best Practices Additional
Metadata (in
Addition to
Document
Metadata)
Social
Best Practice – Environmental Training is more effective
Performance,
when done in person for on-site staff that could impact
Community
storm water discharge limit compliance
Benefits,
When training staff and contractors at a laboratory facility like
Social Impacts
Shell Technology Center Houston, it is important to help them
understand that they are an important part of the process in
keeping the storm water conveyance system as clean as
possible. Each activity on site can cause issues for the storm
water system if precautions are not taken. It is therefore
important to follow the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
and make sure there is good communication (best achieved
through in-person visits) with the various parties working on
site.
Best Practice – Environmental compliance requirement
monitoring is improved through use of a central tracking
tool
All laboratory site Environmental compliance requirements
(i.e.: testing, reporting, training) at Shell Technology Center
Houston are managed together in one single electronic
repository. (i.e.: An Excel spreadsheet) Centralizing this
information for the requirements of all environmental media
(Air, Water, Waste) helps ensure that compliance oversight is
consolidated and can be monitored/managed in one place.
Distributing these requirements to various departments or
individuals leads to higher exposure for non-compliance
during staff/organizational changes.
Internal - SRN-010382 30
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
Best Practice – Effective communication and interpersonal
skills are critical to Environmental support staff working at a
Shell laboratory site such as Shell Technology Center
Houston
Communication is one of the best traits someone can have
who is working in the environmental space. If there is poor
communication then that will put other parties on edge, which
can be very detrimental in the environmental space. It is
important not to give the impression that you are holding back
or hiding something. Open and honest communication,
including listening to the other party and trying to understand
their view, as well as trying to meet their needs, is of great
benefit. Other parties (regulators etc.) have a reason for
doing what they need to do and so letting them do that will
put them at ease.
Internal - SRN-010382 31
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
10. Lessons Learned
Lessons Learned Additional
Metadata (in
Addition to
Document
Metadata)
Lesson Learned – Site Environmental experts at a
laboratory facility should inspect site conditions after an
Environmental incident
It can be invaluable for Environmental experts at a laboratory
facility, like Shell Technology Center Houston, to get out to the
site after Environmental incidents occur. This allows the
experts to understand the causes of incidents, conditions under
which the incidents occurred, and helps them to determine
ways to help the site prevent recurrence of similar incidents.
This is not to say that normal Incident Investigations are not
warranted, but these visual observations by Environmental
staff who understand the regulatory and non-regulatory
requirements, gives them additional data for future
improvement planning.
Lessons Learned – Volumes of Sample Spills were
significantly reduced when shipping parties were made
aware of improper packaging issues and were held
accountable for the sample spill volumes
The Shell Technology Center Houston laboratory does a
significant amount of research for various Shell entities, and
other 3rd parties. Historically, many of the samples that were
shipped to the site via normal courier services (FedEx, UPS,
DHL, etc.) arrived leaking. A process was instituted that
leaking package entities were contacted about the spill from
their samples, were educated on proper shipping procedures,
and spill volumes were attributed to their respective
organizations, if they were Shell entities. This procedure
significantly reduced spill volumes due to improperly shipped
Internal - SRN-010382 32
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
samples over time. (Non-Shell entities were sent proper
sample shipping guidance when spilled samples were received
from them.)
Internal - SRN-010382 33
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
11. Risks / Challenges for the Future
Risks / Challenges and Recommendations for the Future Additional
Metadata (in
Addition to
Document
Metadata)
Internal - SRN-010382 34
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
Challenge for the Future – If Shell Technology Center
Houston (STCH) is moved to the Woodcreek site
A challenge for the future would be if the STCH decides to
move operations to the nearby Woodcreek site. All current
permits would have to be analysed and likely new permits
would have to be acquired for such a move. Some of the items
of particular concern include: permitting a new flare at
Woodcreek (each PBR permit would have to be assessed for
the new location as these permit requirements are tied to the
distance to the nearest receptor), certain STCH permits (e.g.:
the Cogen unit) are grandfathered under older regulations
and wouldn’t likely remain grandfathered with a location
move. Furthermore, environmental compliance would need to
continue to be managed at STCH for closure while new
permits are being acquired for research related activities at
Woodcreek.
Challenge for the Future – Changing activities at Shell
Technology Center Houston (STCH) could either simplify or
complicate Environmental permits and environmental
compliance at the laboratory site
The STCH laboratory site is currently at a major decision
crossroad. It is unsure if the STCH will move, if it will stay
where it is and get smaller, or if it will stay where it is and take
on more 3rd Party customers and grow. If STCH moves, the
regulatory requirements will likely increase as historically
grandfathered equipment/permits having to be re-permitted
for the new location. If STCH gets smaller due to changing
activities, some Environmental permitting and compliance
elements might become easier. However, if new third parties
are brought onsite, they would need to be aligned with
STCH’s operations at the time, which might require different
and/or additional environmental controls.
Internal - SRN-010382 35
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
Risk for the Future – Numerous small Environmental permit
violations at a laboratory facility can lead to unwanted
attention from regulators. Managing the small things (or the
details) is therefore very important
It is often the little things that sometimes get forgotten about,
which in turn can cause minor permit violations. Numerous
small violations can get the attention of regulatory agencies
and bring agency personnel to the site for inspections because
they are seeing these numerous small permit violations. This
means that if required information or data is omitted from
Environmental reports, or if minor permit infractions occur,
these can have detrimental implications down the line. This is
because Shell Technology Center Houston is a self-reporting
entity, so not including things, or multiple minor violations can
cause larger and possibly expensive repercussions for the
business if regulators get interested and more involved.
Challenge for the Future – Shell Group Sustainability Goals
are often not applicable to a Shell Research type facility
and those that are face significant challenges to
achievement at a business or project level at the site
There are 3 key challenges to implementing Shell Group
Sustainability goals at a laboratory facility like the Shell
Technology Center Houston: Implementing sustainable
development goals that come from Shell Group are often very
difficult because these goals are not aligned with sustainability
opportunities that can actually be implemented at the STCH
site. The Environmental staff at STCH have limited ability to
influence projects and business entities and on site, and no
power to mandate that they incorporate Shell Group
sustainability goals into their practices. Projects have a limited
budget and often do not use that budget to pursue sustainable
development goals, or only choose to adopt low-cost goals.
Internal - SRN-010382 36
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
12. Opportunities for Improvement /
Recommendations for the Future
Opportunities for Improvement / Recommendations for the Additional
Future Metadata (in
Addition to
Document
Metadata)
Recommendation for the Future – Staying ahead of
Environmental changes at a Shell laboratory have been
dependent upon having strong personal relationships with
key site stakeholders based upon mutual trust
Roles and responsibilities at a laboratory site like Shell
Technology Center Houston (STCH) change with personnel
changes, site leadership changes, and site management
approaches change with time. The best way to ensure
understanding of the possible environmental implications of
changes at a site as large and complex as STCH, is to maintain
close relationships with all parties involved so that there is an
awareness if there are any changes. Building these
relationships and not placing blame when things go wrong,
helps build and earn trust with key stakeholders. During times
of change, these relationships pay dividends by unsolicited
sharing of information with the Environmental focal point, and
support to ensure seamless handover of activities that help to
maintain environmental compliance and improved
environmental performance.
Recommendation for the Future – A sandblasting procedure
for the new sandblasting area at the Shell Technology
Center Houston should be developed and implemented to
protect neighbouring properties in certain wind conditions
Internal - SRN-010382 37
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
13. Key Information Sources
None noted during the ROCK interview, but several were shared in handover work with
those that will be taking on Ms. Collier’s work responsibilities. (Maurice Pinder and others)
Internal - SRN-010382 38
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
Literature References
None noted during the ROCK interview.
Internal - SRN-010382 39
Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier – Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and
Waste - GSUSI-PTS-S
Bibliographic Information
Report Number SRN-010382
Title Retention of Critical Knowledge - Beth Collier –
Environmental Specialist: Air, Water and Waste -
GSUSI-PTS-S
Subject Retention of Critical Knowledge Report
Keywords Environmental Compliance; Site Environmental
Support; Shell Technology Center Houston; STCH;
Laboratory; Environmental Compliance; Air
Compliance; Water Compliance; Waste Compliance;
Air Emission Management; Water Discharge
Management; Waste Management; Air; Water;
Waste; Respect for Nature; Sustainability; Critical
Knowledge; Knowledge Retention; LFE; Learning from
Experience
Author(s) Kosiara, Mark SHLUSA-HRL/LK; Collier, Beth B
GSUSI-PTS/S
Reviewed by Smith, Rob L GSUSI-PTS/ST
Approved by Smith, Rob L GSUSI-PTS/ST
Issuing Company Shell USA, Inc.
Publishing Date September 2024
Security Classification Internal
Internal - SRN-010382 40